good afternoon and welcome to downing
street for today's coronavirus briefing
i'm joined by
professor jonathan vantam the deputy
chief medical officer
and dr mary ramsey the head of
immunization at public health england
and i've got some fantastic news to
bring you today
on the success of the vaccination
rollout and the protection that it's
bringing
right across the united kingdom right
now
yesterday we delivered 529
119 vaccinations more than half a
million
and that means that today exactly 100
days
since margaret keenan got that first
authorized
jab in the whole world we have now
vaccinated
over 25 million people across the united
kingdom
it's been such a national mission one of
the biggest
logistical exercises since the war
and i've had the honor of playing
my part we've had the honor of playing
our parts it's been a
huge team effort and i've got absolutely
no doubt
it's the it it's the best project i've
ever been
involved in and i want to say a huge
thank you to everybody
who lent in and has done so much
to put this country in the position
we're in where we've been able
and to vaccinate almost half of the
adult population
25 million people
and i think that it's nothing that any
of us who've been involved in it
from the start we'll ever forget but
what really matters
is why this is making a difference and
we have some very exciting
information for you today about the real
world
impact that the vaccination rollout is
having if we could have the first
the slide please this slide shows over
time
the increase in the proportion of people
who actually have covert 19 antibodies
those are the antibodies that are so
crucial in our ability to fight the
disease
this chart isn't measuring how many
vaccines have been done
it's actually measuring the proportion
of people
who have the covert fighting antibodies
swimming around in their bloodstream
this chart represents
the fact that the vaccine is giving the
country
protection and as you can see
it runs up to the start of march
and it shows around 90 percent
of people age around 70 and above
at that point had these antibodies
and it has continued to expand further
in the two weeks or so since then
the chart explains why deaths from covid
in this country are now thankfully
falling so fast
they're down by over a third in the last
week
again and the vaccine is saving
thousands of lives right now here in the
uk
and it can give us all hope and
professor van tam is going to say
a little more about this and the safety
details in a second
and all of this underlines how important
it is
that when you get the call get the job
i find this data really compelling and
to anybody who still has concerns or
any doubt about getting the jab we know
that the vaccine is safe and helps make
you safe
it gives you this protection and dr mary
ramsey is with us because
she's going to set out details of a
publication that public health england
have just
released with more evidence of the
impact of the vaccine
to show what this protection is like and
that shows that after a single dose of
the vaccine
either vaccine protection against
covid19 is around
60 percent that's protection against
getting it
protection against hospitalization is
around 80 percent
and protection against death is around
and one of the other interesting facts
that is really important is that the
vaccine offers protection to you but it
also protect offers protection to those
around you
and the data show that if you live with
someone who's been vaccinated
you have a 30 lower risk of catching
covid19
yourself this is the first data that
directly measures the impact of the
vaccine on reducing transmission
and it shows that the vaccines are
saving lives
both vaccines being rolled out in the uk
are not just safe but they make you safe
they're saving lives
and protecting people and because we're
rolling out
so fast and because we've protected so
many people so quickly
we're now able to extend the offer of a
vaccination to yet
more people all people age 50 and above
are from today invited to come forward
and get a jam
the nhs will contact you and today we're
sending over
two million texts and letters and
invitations
to get vaccinated anyone aged 50 and
over
can now sign up on the nhs.uk website or
call
119 we're on track to offer a first dose
to everyone in priority groups one to
nine by the 15th of april
while we deliver on that commitment we
also want to ensure
that this offer reaches everyone in
groups one to nine
so at the same time as
opening up offers of vaccinations to all
those who are 50 or above
we're going to do whatever it takes to
reach all those
in the most vulnerable groups who
haven't come forward yet
before we move on to the next cohort
which is people in their 40s
so my message to our huge team of
vaccinators
is let's keep getting the numbers
through the doors
but it's absolutely critical that we
reach out and we loop back
and we invite in yet again all those who
are in vulnerable groups
who haven't yet been vaccinated i want
to get those percentages of the
people in vulnerable groups the
percentages who've been vaccinated i
want to get them
right up reaching every last vulnerable
person
and it is worth that extra effort and
we'll do that
before we move on to people in their 40s
now i'm 42
and i'm as eager as anyone to get the
jam but before we forge ahead i want us
to be confident
that we've done everything we can to
protect those most
in need of protection and we will do all
we can
and do everything necessary to secure
the supplies
that are contractually committed to
protecting people
in this country so we're moving in the
right direction
thanks to everybody following the rules
that are keeping us safe now and thanks
to everybody coming forward
to get a jab that will keep us safe
for the future now is not the time to
waver
we're on the road to recovery the
vaccine is our way out
we are on track so let's stick with it
follow the rules
and when you get the call get the jab
i'm now going to ask mary to set out
more details
of that excellent data on the
effectiveness of the two vaccines
thank you um i'd just like to start by
adding my thanks to secretary of state
to the thousands of people who've been
involved in making this program a
success
from the scientists who produce the
vaccine from the people who make sure
the vaccine gets to the right places
those injecting people every day
and all the people behind the scenes who
are doing all the planning and
and coordination it's really been a
great effort
um and i've worked in immunisation for
30 years in in the uk
and this is the largest and most uh fast
delivered but in the most speed i've
ever been involved in it really is a
great credit to the public health system
in this country
around a month ago we published our
first data showing the effectiveness of
the vaccine
and today we've published an update on
that and the good news is that
uh things are continuing to show that
this these vaccines
are effective uh there's
we're showing good protection in the
over 70s
we've compared individuals who test
positive to individuals who test
negative and
shown that there is a sixty percent
reduction in your chance of catching
covid
if you are uh over 70 and have been
vaccinated
with both vaccines and those effects are
maintained for several weeks they don't
go away they're still there
even after a single dose and then you
get additional protection from the
second dose
on top of that even if you do get
covid having been vaccinated our data
shows that your risk of requiring
hospital admission
is reduced by a further 40 percent
based on whether you've had either the
astrazeneca vaccine
or the fisa vaccine and when you put
those two figures together
that means that in the over 80s we are
preventing
80 percent of hospital admissions it's
80 protection against
admissions we have a little bit longer
data for the fisa vaccine and again
if you have a quartz covid despite
being vaccinated and have had a single
dose of fisa vaccine
what we have shown is that your chance
of dying from the infection
is reduced by 54 so really a very
a big additional reduction and again if
you put that together
with the protection that you're getting
against infection in the first place
that means that there's almost 85
percent
protection against dying with a single
dose of the vaccine
and again we see better figures after
the second dose
uh on top of that our data in health
workers has shown that healthcare
workers who are vaccinated have a 70
reduction in their risk of getting
infected after a single dose
and that's whether they are a
symptomatic case or an asymptomatic case
and that means they are therefore less
likely to spread to vulnerable
individuals that they care for
and the really exciting data that came
from scotland last week
suggested that those vaccinated
healthcare workers have a 30
chance lower chance of passing infection
onto their
household contacts as secretary of
state's already mentioned
so this is really the first evidence we
have of a reduction in transmission
from vaccinating and it means that the
more people we vaccinate
the more we are going to be able to
reduce the spread of infection
so uh overall this is really now
translating into seeing a decline in
deaths and serious cases from this
infection
and it means every day we vaccinate more
people we are preventing more deaths
so uh i think we also
know as i think we've seen the antibody
data we've done a study today again
which shows that 75 percent of that
older group have protection and
immunity in their blood so again very
good
results so overall we will expect to see
as more people are vaccinated
a bigger impact on cases on
hospitalizations
and on deaths so i just use this
opportunity to encourage anybody who's
eligible for vaccine to come forward to
take the vaccine
both vaccines work incredibly
effectively i myself had astrazeneca
vaccine on friday
and i'm very pleased that i'm now
hopefully as well protected as the
people we've been studying
thank you thank you very much dr ramsey
professor bantam
thank you secretary of state good
afternoon
i don't mind repeating my thanks on top
of everybody else's
to the nhs teams who day after day
continue with the vaccination program
it's a real tribute to their
perseverance and determination
that they do so and i feel very
privileged to occasionally be able to
stand alongside them
and help out in the vaccine centers
as the secretary of state has announced
we are now into the last
um cohort of the phase one program
it's important we get that done properly
before we
move on to phase two because phase one
uh is where the patients are who suffer
the mortality and you know
a bit like a football game where the
strikers
who score the wonder goals are the ones
who make the headlines
actually the hard yards are done by the
defenders
and by the defensive midfielders
tracking back tracking back
for 90 minutes of the whole game
watching everybody's back
and this is what it's going to be about
now tracking back
and making sure that we finish the job
properly
in the phase one cohorts before we move
on
that high uptake is really really
important
i will turn now and spend a few moments
addressing what has clearly been a very
important and topical
media story in the last few days which
is about
vaccine safety and in particular
the the
events in europe relating to the
astrazeneca vaccine
and the stories about blood clots
so where i will begin is that
um with the european medicines agencies
spokesperson themselves and their
statement
this is the european medicines regulator
our equivalent of the mhra in europe
there is no indication that vaccination
has caused
these conditions we are still firmly
convinced
that the benefits of the az vaccine in
preventing covid19
outweigh the risks of side effects
and i think that's really important to
emphasize that that is the official
position
of the european regulator as it is the
official position of our regulator
the mhra but behind the scenes
there is a lot of work going on to look
at
whether there is a signal in relation to
what we call venous thromboembolic
events
clots vte for short and
there's a lot of evidence emerging now
that is reassuring that there is no
overall
excess signal or increased risk and i
expect
without prejudice to their absolute
findings those to be the final
conclusions of the ema and the mhra
in due course so no no evidence
of increased risk but as you heard from
professor ramsey
a lot of evidence that the vaccine is
actually
saving lives and that's the really
important thing
that um we push on with this
and i think from the enthusiasm of the
patients i've vaccinated i see
the enthusiasm of the british people to
push on with this
because vaccines don't save lives if
they're in
fridges they only save lives if they're
in
arms and that's a really important fact
all medicines have side effects
and all medicines have benefits and
that's the whole point that you
have to look at both sides and say how
big are the benefits in relation to the
risks
so even something really simple like
paracetamol
and here's a data sheet from a box of
the rare side effects are allergic
reactions such as skin rash mouth sores
fever difficulty breathing more prone to
bleeding bruising fever infections
nausea sudden weight loss loss of
appetite
jaundice yellowing of the eyes and skin
those are documented
rare side effects of paracetamol but we
all understand
the benefits of them and this is no
different a situation
that there's no proven association
with the blood clots and we have very
clear evidence that these vaccines are
beneficial
and save lives from what is otherwise um
for some people
particularly the ones we are targeting a
potentially lethal disease
i'll stop there secretary of state thank
you very much jbt
and we'll now go to questions from the
public
and then questions from the media the
first question
is from lynn from newcastle
will shielding end on march the 31st i'm
lucky enough to have had both my files
and vaccinations
and i would like to return to work as a
nurse in the nhs will this be possible
on
april the 1st yes it will
at lynn i'm delighted to say that
shielding will be able to end
on the 31st of march and i'm
absolutely delighted that we'll be able
to welcome you back
into the nhs as a nurse and we'll know
how important it is to get more nurses
into the nhs and getting you back
will be a very very important step so
i'm delighted you've had
both of your vaccines i hope you've
heard from
dr ramsey just how effective uh they
are and uh it's uh it's it's great news
that uh you'll be uh we'll be inviting
you back that's fantastic thank you very
much indeed
uh sarah from wiltshire uh has sent a
question in and the question is
in the united states vaccinated people
can meet indoors with other vaccinated
people
or with others where there is low risk
what are the plans to adopt similar
measures in the uk
and at what point will it be deemed to
be safe for social distancing among
vaccinated adults
to be no longer necessary well this is a
really
really important question and the
approach we're taking in the uk
sarah is that we're going to take the
steps together
down the road map because it's not
possible to vaccinate
everybody at once we've been taking a
clinically
advised priority in terms of who gets
vaccinated who you know what's the order
of the queue
and then we've said that because
that means that there's you know we are
providing the vaccine to different
people at different times
the fair and right thing is to then
lift all the measures at once and for as
in
measures for all people at once as
opposed to differentiate by
who has and hasn't had the vaccine also
because we've got to put in place anyway
for things like international travel
and ability to show you've had the
vaccine but that isn't there
yet so we've decided to take an approach
where uh the
whether the whole of the whole country
moves uh in one
step uh at a time thank you very much
indeed
and the next question is from laura
koonsberg at the bbc
laura thank you very much secretary of
state you've just told everybody that we
are on track
with the vaccination but you haven't
mentioned this letter from the nhs
which has just be come out which says
that there is a significant
reduction in the available supply and
that vaccine centers should
stop taking appointments for the whole
month of april
what is going on um and can you explain
that shortage in supply and what do you
make of comments from brussels today
from the president of the eu commission
about the uk should be sending vaccines
to the european union
thanks very much indeed well as i set
out in my in my remarks now that we've
opened up to the
50 and overs and then we're going to
really focus
on getting the vaccine to those who are
the most vulnerable
and of course we have a whole load of
second doses that we need to
deliver vaccine supply is always lumpy
and we regularly send out technical
letters to the
nhs to explain the ups and downs of
the supply over the future weeks and
what you're referring to
is a standard one of those letters but
i've set out
the details in terms of how we can
deliver on the vaccine program
where we're on track to meet the target
of
uh offering to all groups one to nine uh
on the 15th of april i mean if you think
about it it's currently
the middle of march and we've already
been able to open up the
uh to invite all over 50s
in and we need to make sure that we
reach
just as high a proportion as possible
and
you'll see in the letter it refers to
the focus that's needed
on the particularly vulnerable groups so
that's what we're going to be doing
to protect as many people as possible
turning to the issue
of supply from the european union of
course we work with our european
colleagues all the time it's important
to set out
that the oxford astrazeneca vaccine
was produced from research that was
funded by
the uk government tens of millions of
pounds
we set up the supply chain not just here
in the uk
but indeed we helped set up the supply
chain
in the eu this vaccine is provided
at cost to the whole world so it's now
being manufactured all the way around
the world
and we legally signed a contract for
delivery of the first 100 million doses
here for people in the uk as you would
expect
both to ensure that people in the uk can
get their jab and also
because this is a uk funded uk delivered
vaccine but we're very happy for others
around the world to be able to also
manufacture it
at cost but at the same time as
um president of the
uh president vandalian has said she said
there should not be
restrictions on the export of vaccines
by companies
where they are fulfilling contractual
responsibilities
and so the supply of vaccines from
eu production facilities to the uk is
indeed fulfilling contractual
responsibilities
and we fully expect those contracts to
be
delivered on
next question is from romly weeks at itv
health secretary dominic cummings seems
to think that your department is to
blame for one of the biggest
failings of the pandemic the supply of
ppe and has nothing to do with one of
its biggest
biggest successes the vaccine rollout is
that how you see it
uh well the vaccines rollout has been a
huge team effort
and it's been a an awful lot of people
pulling together to make it happen
obviously the the health department my
department also the vaccines task force
uh who've been absolutely brilliant and
the nhs
who have led the way in terms of the
delivery uh it's been a huge team
effort and the one of the striking
things
about being involved in the vaccine
rollout is that the spirit
is a positive mission driven can can-do
spirit that we all share
and i think everybody involved in the
vaccine rollout would agree that we have
that
positive esprit de corps and that's the
best way to leave it
the next question from catherine
sampson at stv thank you health
secretary uh with the vaccine rollout
underway i think
a number of families are really
desperate to find out when they can
reunite with loved ones who live in
different
uk nations now yesterday the first
minister of scotland suggested
cross-border travel restrictions would
ease from around the 26th of april but
she didn't give a firm date so i'm just
wondering do you have a firm day and do
you think it's important
that the whole of the uk moves as one on
this and just on a separate note while
i'm here
just wondered what you made of your
former cabinet colleague david davies
statement
in the comments yesterday was he right
to use parliamentary privilege to do it
uh thanks very much so on the first
question
um i very much look forward to
the uh the all the restrictions on
travel within the uk being removed
i i i that we i've we've set out the
when the english restrictions will be
removed and we'll lift
the stay at home message as part of the
road map out
and i have no doubt that within a short
few weeks
everybody will be free to travel around
the uk
so long as we're able to keep this
progress going both the progress in the
uk wide vaccination effort
and keeping the number of cases under
control
when it comes to the what my colleague
david davis said in the house he's a
very experienced parliamentarian very
long-standing
it is absolutely right and proper to be
able to use parliamentary privilege
in the way that he did parliamentarians
should give
due consideration before using
parliamentary privilege
and i'm sure that he did that um the
next question from jason groves at the
daily mail
uh thanks health secretary uh you skated
over uh
this issue of a falling vaccine supply
like it's some kind of technical issue
but
i mean reading this letter it feels like
a pretty big deal there are millions of
people
uh under 50 who are waiting for their
jabs and it looks like
that's going to be delayed can you tell
the under 50s when they're going to get
their jab
can you also explain to them why people
in their 40s
who want the jab should have to wait
while you try and strong-arm people
older people who
who don't want it so uh and can you also
just tell us whether
this setback is going to have any impact
on
the lockdown timetable no um
as i said the supply is always lumpy
and we are on course to
deliver the offer that everybody who's
age 50 and above
will be able to get vaccinated by the
15th of april
i recommit to that today and
of course you know these supply
schedules have moved up and down
throughout this whole rollout it's
absolutely
uh par for the course uh and um
it is a that that's why it's a you know
that is a normal operational
letter but the critical thing in terms
of the readers of the daily mail is i
can
assure readers of the daily mail that
there is
enough supply and we have the nhs across
the uk
ready to be able to deliver on the offer
of a vaccine to all over 50s by
the 15th of april um and
so what about the under 50s when are
they going to get their jabs
looks like they're going to have to wait
at least an extra month yeah no
because we're committed to all adults
being able to get the
jab by the end of july
and we're on track to deliver on that
commitment
so it is uh we're making absolutely
fantastic progress in the vaccination
effort i'm delighted we're able to open
up
uh to millions more people today
and of course the you know the future
forecasts are always
uh lumpy and sometimes they go up and
sometimes they go down
but we've made these public commitments
and i'm absolutely uh
absolutely delighted with the team
because we're on track to meet them
thanks very much um and the next
question is from
aubry alegretti at the guardian
good afternoon mr hancock uh scientists
doctors the bereaved and now dominic
cummings have urged for a lessons
learned public inquiry
into the government's handling of
coronavirus why can't we have one now
are you concerned that the department of
health couldn't cope with the pressure
of public inquiry
at the same time as the pandemic and to
professor van tan
has every lesson that could have been
learned so far been learned
if not then wouldn't a public inquiry
ensure that happens
sooner rather than later well we're less
we're learning lessons all the time i
mean um the
we're learning lessons from the vaccine
rollout you've just heard some of the
extra evidence
we constantly look at the actions that
we take
and work out how we can how we can make
sure the response is as good as possible
so that is happening all of the time
professor bantam
yes thank you for the question i mean i
think the timing of inquiries
is entirely a matter for ministers and
politicians it's not a matter
for physicians
personally would the an inquiry be
an unwelcome distraction for me
personally
at the moment when i'm very focused on
the vaccine program
and the vaccine program we might need in
the autumn
who knows i think it would be
an extra burden that wasn't necessary
is looking back on what you did and
whether you could do things better
a function of medicine in terms of the
clinical audit that happens in
every gp surgery and every nhs trust up
and down the land
yes it is will lessons be learned in due
course
i am sure lessons will emerge uh thanks
very much
uh final question is from emily ashton
from bloomberg emily
hello and for matt hancock i just wanted
to ask you say that the vaccination
targets will still be met
is there any scope then to bring forward
the dates of the roadmap for easing
lockdown
or are they absolutely the earliest
dates possible
and for mr hancock and professor van tam
if possible
as more people are vaccinated and data
is showing that more and more people
are out and about despite these rules in
place
some older people are meeting people
indoors now they've been vaccinated
you see people playing football in the
parks at the weekend what do you say to
those people tempted to break
restrictions once they've been
vaccinated
and is there a risk of a possible third
wave as we're seeing in other european
countries like italy
uh thanks very much i mean on the second
question
going and playing football with your own
family in the parks is absolutely fine
uh
and always has been so i i i'm not sure
that's a
a piece of evidence that we should take
for people breaking the rules in fact
i'd say that my both what we measure and
my experience of being out and about is
that people are
being unbelievably uh supportive of the
rules and and doing their bit i think
that's um
i think it's i think it's terrific how
the british people have
have uh risen to this challenge that
we've all faced
um and um jbt i don't know if you've got
anything to add yes
thank you i have um two two
key science points um people should
remember
that it takes quite a while for
antibodies
to become measurable in the bloodstream
after vaccination
certainly 14 days in
in the younger age groups almost
certainly 21 days
or more in the older age groups but
given the
data that i've seen and perhaps
professor ramsey will comment further on
this
that vaccine effectiveness after the
first dose
continues to increase beyond the 21 day
mark
clearly there is something going on
about
further maturation of the immune
response and greater protection
so you're not protected the moment
you've had the vaccine
it may be several weeks and you still
then require a second dose
before you are optimally protected
nevertheless i understand and i you get
it in my emails about can i go and see
x or y now i've had the vaccine
you know clinically once properly and
fully vaccinated
it is you know you are materially safer
but my message to everybody is look
let's try and get out of where we are
through
the successful use of vaccines once
can we just do it properly once so
please
hold the line just a little bit longer
and we're only talking a few
more months just hold the line because
it will get better
thanks very much dr ramsey yes i mean i
think it's
it's not just about yourself of course
with vaccination it's about protecting
others and of course
uh we want as high level of protection
as possible before we really want people
to start
behaving more as they as they used to so
i think our message is quite clear
um you know once you've had your vaccine
it'll take a while
please don't change your change your
behavior try and carry on
as much as you can keeping to the rules
keeping the distance
and avoiding unnecessary contact
thanks very much indeed yes
about the dates for unlocking the road
map are those dates set in stone
as the earliest possible dates uh yes
they're set out in the roadmap
um and the reason for those dates is to
give five weeks between steps so that we
can
see the effect of each step before
making a decision
after four weeks with a week to go as to
whether we're able to take the next step
it's a it's a cautious but we hope
irreversible path and the effectiveness
of the vaccine that
dr ramsey set out today gives me
increased confidence
that we're going to be able to walk down
that road
as set out in the road map and
we can see that the vaccines are making
people
safe and and saving lives
and we're on track on the vaccine side
and we've seen the cases
coming down critically we're seeing the
number of hospitalizations
and deaths falling very sharply and that
is good news for us all
thanks very much indeed
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news